<div class="page-header">
   <h1>Activeweb</h1>
   <h4>Full stack web framework</h4>
</div>

Provides everything you need for building a modern dynamic web application or a REST-ful web service.

## Design principles
*  **Convention over configuration** - zero configuration is required to develop ActiveWeb applications, and some conventions are overridable.
*  **Highest degree of developer productivity** - ActiveWeb allows developers to build real Java web projects without the
    need for the typical compile/package/deploy/start cycle. A container is started once, and development can continue.
    ActiveWeb will recompile controllers and reload them into a running container on the fly.
* **Adherence to Java standards** - ActiveWeb binds to core Java standards: JDBC and Servlets.
* **First-rate built-in testing capabilities** - ActiveWeb provides the ability to test every discrete business function,
       including data generated by business logic, the content and structure of generated HTML/JSON/XML/XYZ,
       and complex user scenarios, all without having to start a container. ActiveWeb is perfect for true TDD/BDD, and
       it promotes writing specifications (tests) before coding implementations.
* **Full stack web development platform** - unlike many other Java frameworks,
    which usually solve only one problem, ActiveWeb is a full stack development framework for the Web.
    It provides all features that are integrated together.
* **Integrated dependency injection** - ActiveWeb integrates Google Guice as a dependency injection container.
* **ActiveWeb uses ActiveJDBC as ORM layer** - ActiveWeb uses ActiveJDBC as ORM layer. This is a lightweight integration,
    and both frameworks work very well together. However, developers still have the option of using a different ORM package if desired.
* **Built-in support for Unobtrusive JavaScript** - this allows for the development of dynamic Ajax applications without
    having to write repetitive JavaScript code. Unobtrusive JavaScript does not clutter HTML pages as generated JavaScript would.


## Documentation

Follow to: [ActiveWeb documentation](documentation#activeweb)

## 5 minute video to understand ActiveWeb

Watch a quick video on Youtube that demonstrates ActiveWeb's ability to add code to the application
dynamically, at run time.

<iframe width="425" height="344" frameborder="0" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/YX1TAtuSqQE"></iframe>

Direct link to video on Youtube: [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YX1TAtuSqQE](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YX1TAtuSqQE)

## Quick guide to ActiveWeb

To get a quick idea on what this is about, see [Five Minute Guide To ActiveWeb](five_minute_guide_to_activeweb)


## Releases

Please, refer to [the Releases](releases) page.


## How to download

### Maven

~~~~ {.xml  .numberLines}
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.javalite</groupId>
    <artifactId>activeweb</artifactId>
    <version>1.15</version>
</dependency>
~~~~


### Direct link

Use direct link in [Maven Central](http://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cjavalite)

## Support

For support, please refer to <a href="https://groups.google.com/forum/?hl=en#!forum/activeweb">ActiveWeb Google Groups</a></p>

